How can resistance to an issue demonstrate the changing landscape of the issue itself?  Indirect rule was a system implemented in the 30s by colonial forces in Africa by which traditional African chiefs were ‘advised’ by Western officials on how to best rule their population. This policy came at a time known as the Scramble for Africa, in which Western forces were laying claim to large swaths of Africa, and led to a policy of racial segregation and hegemony known as ‘apartheid’ in South África. African responses to the progression of colonial rule provide a useful yardstick with which to understand the progression of these policies and colonial rule in South Africa. Tshekedi Khama, Z.K. Matthews, and Steve Biko were all formally educated Southern African scholars who wrote critiques of colonial rule. Despite these similarities. ZK and Khama’s writings during the 30s have striking differences when juxtaposed with Biko’s writings from the 60s and 70s. Their literature and academic papers fought the same war of anti-colonialism, but Biko’s words are harsher, more direct, and more urgent. Indeed, while Khama and Matthews published academic papers in London softly nudging British policymakers titled ‘Chieftainship under Indirect Rule’ (1936) and ‘An African View of Indirect Rule’ (1937), respectively, Biko used his influence to emphasize the need for a response to the tragedy which was apartheid- his writings, after his death, were consolidated in a book titled ‘I Write What I Like’ (1978). Contrasting these authors provides a rough representation of Africa’s evolving resistance to colonial rule: while all the publications emphasize the need for more empathy from the colonial powers, Biko’s critiques are much more strong-worded and demonstrate the colonial presence’s progression to Apartheid in South Africa.

Before exploring the differences in these papers, it is important to understand the fundamentals blocks which they build upon. The most apparent underlying theme that underpins all three of these authors’ work is castigation of the colonial oppressors for caring more about empty words than actions and Africans’ welfare; this reflects the continuing struggle of Africans dealing with colonial rulers who are indifferent to their ultimate outcome. Indeed, ZK argued that the Western policymakers should consider their constituents’ “welfare, not the reputation of [their] policy, [as their] constant objective." (437)  Similarly, Khama, who served many years as a chief, felt that “both the personal and official rights of a Chief in his community have been to a very great extent overlooked if not ignored,” (251) further bolstering the idea that these policies weren’t designed with the impact on Africans in mind. We can compare these claims in the 30s to Biko’s later publications.  Biko’s writing heavily emphasized the fact that the societal structures set up by colonial forces had evolved to a point where cooperation and truth itself wasn’t prioritized to any real degree. Indeed, he argues the British had set up a role for themselves in which they were expected to create false issues with the local population, simply to “to justify their employment." (74)  This can be seen as a progression: the colonial powers’ indifference to African welfare turned into a self-perpetuating bias and animosity towards the African populace. All three publications clearly felt the colonial powers were unfairly discounting the African experience; this serves to highlight the fact that colonial rule was never welcomed, and colonial powers never cared for the perspective of those colonized.

While their underlying disapproval remained unchanged, a telling difference in these periods is showcased by the writing’s change of tone: while ZK Matthews and Khama were soft-spoken and polite in their critiques, Biko did not shy away from directly attacking colonial rule and its impacts. For instance, the earlier author Khama, during his supposed rebuke of the system of indirect rule, apologizes for his opinions- saying “if I have overstated the position, I may be excused for doing so.” (253) Indeed, he says that Africans must “must admit” (254) that the Supreme Authority of colonial rule must use its controlling power to control and that no African tribe could question that right. Biko makes no such concessions or statements of deference. In his eyes, the West has absolutely no business claiming to be a Supreme Authority- this comes across in his writing- as a sharply critical tone and argument. He deplores the “arrogance of white people that makes them believe that white leadership is a sine qua non in this country.” (26) In his eyes, the only true and stable integration with colonial powers can come after “mutual respect” (22) is established. A mutual respect- which he does not harbor, calling the colonial enterprise of apartheid “obviously evil.” (27)  The reason for these differences is clear: the authors were writing for two different sets of audiences. Biko did not publish his work for the white ruling class, hoping to get academics and policy-makers to consider the virtues of African autonomy, like ZK and Khama did; no, he published in order to fire up his people against the injustices they were so clearly facing. No longer were Africans merely “irritated” but they were infuriated. This is representative of the state of affairs at his time of writing; Western policymakers had created an environment where the only pushback the African populace could give was directly in Africa, not through pleading with the colonial powers in England.

What truly underlied the difference between these two sets of authors is the fact that the systems they were criticizing was fundamentally different. In the decades between the publications, indirect rule and relevant policies had evolved into what we now consider apartheid- we see this through the authors’ critiques of the perspective the West has adopted when it comes to Africans and their sovereignty.

Indeed, we see the authors speak differently of the gap between the colonial powers and the African populace across the decades; the discourse evolves from hoping for mutual recognition and respect to a devolved society where violence and fear trumped all. During the 1930s, Khama and ZK implored the colonial powers to understand the situation of the Africans. Khama, while criticizing indirect rule, stated that an outside and neutral opinion would be necessary for shared rule among a colonial administrator and african ruler. The reason for this, he explained, is that African culture is quite a bit different than Western culture; for example, Western culture is much more atomized.  ZK offers a potential solution for this gap by way of employing anthropologists- he believes that the craze for a simplistic view of Africa “will be just as harmful in administrative work at it has been in other directions.” (437) However, while ZK and Khama were optimistic about the colonial powers’ ability to integrate their cultural differences, Biko painted a starkly different picture. He described the state of Africa as having descended into a “tripartite system of fear” (79) whereby whites feared blacks, blacks feared whites, and the government feared blacks. He claimed that the colonial powers did not approach African people with the intention of understanding- instead, he argued that they had a mindset of being the “settler minority, yet supreme masters.” (74) This meant that they had a “duty to show they have the upper hand” (74) and created a society in which there was no possibility for compromise. Through these differing views, we see the portrait of a society in which the colonial powers steeped themselves in willful ignorance of the populace over which they were ruling, eventually becoming completely removed from their welfare.

Further, Biko believes that colonial powers could not live peacefully among Africans,
while Khama and Mathews held hope for reconciliation. The entire purpose of the writings by Khama and Mathews was, after all, to convince colonial policymakers to draft more favorable policies, yet Biko proclaims “no amount of moral lecturing will persuade the white man to ‘correct’ the situation.” (92) Indeed, Khama believed that the friction between Africa and its new colonial ruling class was caused by “misunderstandings” (255), while Mathews was equally hopeful for the prospects of integration. This is a perfect encapsulation of the changing social response to colonial rule in South Africa. Colonial rulers, who were once seen as a new addition and member of the South African continent were eventually outed for what they were, proponents of “an integration based on exploitative values” (91), as Biko put it.

The writings of ZK Matthews, Khama, and Biko provide a valuable insight into the changing landscape of African resistance to colonial rule. We can see how the critiques of colonial rule have evolved from the polite requests for recognition of African autonomy, to a more direct, urgent, and passionate call to action against the atrocities of Apartheid. It is clear that these authors, although writing in different eras, have a shared sentiment of disapproval for the way in which the West has handled their power and authority. Yet, Biko’s later works called for direct participation from the African populace in the midst of a more divided and unjust society. By exploring the differences in their critiques, we can gain an understanding of the social shape of colonial rule and the legacy of oppression that Africans dealt with during the Scramble.