	Why did Britain have such a hard time abolishing slavery on the Gold Coast? The British Empire “abolished” slavery in the Gold Coast in 1874, but their centuries-long practice of exploiting Ghanian slavery did not end there.  While history has been written largely by those who profited from and promoted slavery, a court document of an extraordinary woman by the name of Abina sheds light on the continued existence of the slave trade; this document has since been adapted into a graphic novel called Abina and the Important Men, written by Trevor Getz with illustrations by Liz Clarke, and published in Oxford in 2011. The novel serves the noble purpose of educating modern readers about Ghana’s transition to a colonial society, an otherwise forgotten topic. The story, you see, centers around a young female ex-slave by the name of Abina in colonial Ghana who escaped her servitude and subsequently attempted to sue her enslaver. Her captor, named Eddoo and described in the book as an “important man” (12) was, however, ultimately found not guilty by the British court system.   Through this story’s portrayal of the late 19th century political climate in the Gold Coast, we can conclude that the enforcement of abolition in the Gold Coast was hampered by misaligned incentives and vast misinterpreted cultural differences between British and Ghanian culture.
	Cultural differences are truly at the forefront of this story, as they sabotaged Abina’s trial from beginning to end. The acting judicial assessor, William Melton, was a British man with a clear lack of understanding of African culture.  Eddoo’s lawyer explained that "the British still think of slaves in the sense of field-workers" (20), as they hadn’t yet realized that Western chattel slavery was quite different than the slavery in the Gold Coast.  As such, they relied on a few key indicators of what they believed slavery would look like: an exchange of money, being called a slave, beating of the slave, and field work. Eddoo had already understood that he couldn’t allow Abina to have amunition which which to eventually declare she was a captive slave; using this knowledge during his purchase of Abina, he hid the transaction of money and was ‘only’ threatened to be beaten. Abina was still forced to do labor, but slaves in the Gold Coast did not do field work, and her accounts of being forced to gather “firewood, and water... wash clothes” (29) and do chores rang deaf on Melton’s Western ears. In British culture, those acts would seem much more like duties assigned to a wife as opposed to a slave; indeed, the defendant’s lawyer explains the common tactic of slave owner convincing judicial assessor that their slaves are apprentices or wives, as those are legal Western positions which most resemble the typical Gold Coast slave’s position.
Eddoo and his lawyer further exploited these foreign cultural traditions as they argued against the presence of slavery. For example, Abina brought up the fact that Eddoo gave her “two cloths” (24) and her husband cut off her beads as she was sold to Eddoo, a clear indicator that she was being sold; Eddoo, however, was quick to bring up that there exist complicated traditions involved with cloths and that the giving of it does not “necessarily indicate slavery” (27). Similarly, he pointed out that typical ceremonies which would accompany the buying of a slave weren’t carried out during Abina’s transfer of ownership.  This was sufficient evidence to convince Melton, as British people believed had a warped perspective on Ghanian marriage practices, believing that it was custom to “buy [their] wives” (32). These layers of confusion allow for the purchase of Abina to be misunderstood as a typical part of Ghanian culture, as opposed to what it was, enslavement.
Further deceit came from the language barriers that Melton faced in his rulings. Indeed, language allowed Eddoo’s lawyer to twist the truth into a less egregious form. We see an early example of this when Abina refers to being called an “odonko” (22) with a previous slaveowner; this incites uncertainty surrounding whether or not the term equates to the English definition of slave, as there is no clear translation. She even recounts that once she was in the possession of Eddoo, she was told to obey her “master” (29), which could have been clear evidence that she was indeed a slave, but Eddoo’s lawyer is quick to point out that their language has a myriad of definitions for the word that corresponds to “master,” and thus could not be used to prove that she was enslaved. 
	Even beyond these cultural barriers, misaligned incentives and the theme of corruption obstructed the ability for justice to be carried out.  As Eddoo’s lawyer explained, Melton wasn’t a “trained attorneys, just [a] middle-ranking bureaucrat” (31). He would be put in charge of cases like Abin’sbecause Africans were not allowed to be judicial assessors, and very few Europeans were physically present at the Gold Coast. This explains the clear lack of understanding of and appreciation for African culture that Melton has demonstrated.  Despite Britain's official policy of having abolished slavery, the actual practice of it in the gold coast would, to their perspective, cause massive upheavals in Ghana’s societal structure and their obedience to Enlgish powers– not to mention the fact that slaveowners grew palm oil which profited the Enlgish greatly.  Thus, assessors like Melton are caught between two British perspectives: the spoken policy of abolishing slavery and the unspooken agreement that ruffling too many feathers would cause great harm. We even see the man who helps Abina get to trial go through the same internal struggle as he must contend with the facts that “the British do not like alienating important men” (12) and the entire economic system which he lived under depends on the slave trade, despite slavery being an obvious moral wrong.
	Finally, the members of the jury which Melton brings in towards the end of the trial were themselves biased towards protecting the slaveowner’s interests; you see, in order to be a juror, you had to "speak English well... own land, and be a man” (57) which meant that many were "slave owners or [had] friends who [were]." (58) . They were, in turn, a landowners, a palm oil trader, and a leading chief of the protectorate.  They urged Melton to consider the ramifications of not acquitting Eddoo; all parties involved were aware that Abina was representing the slave class of Ghana, which they all profited greatly from. This is a clear example of the existing institutional structure being too powerful and rigid for a single powerful soul, like Abina, to overcome.
All of the aforementioned factors were allowed to exist because of the benefits that Britain had gained from the slavery in the Gold Coast; despite their formal policy of abolitionism, slavery was extremely profitable for Britain, as the palm oil trade in the Goad Coast region depended on enslaved workers. Had Britain been truly dedicated to expunging the slave trade, they could have relied on more culturally adept judicial assessors, a less biased jury, or a clarified definition of slavery. However, it was not in their interest to do so and as such, the jurors and judicial assessor, Melton, were swayed by perverse incentives which didn’t align with the true spirit of abolitionism, and Melton was woefully uneducated on the intricacies of Ghanian culture; all this paints the picture of a system which couldn’t, and most likely did not want to abolish slavery.