This course introduced me to disability justice, the liberatory mindset, and much more. Before this course, I had no previous exposure to disability justice. Like many of my peers, I had been aware of its existence, but never deeply considered the challenges that people with disabilities face on a daily basis. The activities and assignments in this course, however,  have clearly demonstrated the importance of disability justice and the role that universal design can play in creating a more inclusive and accessible world. Similarly, the practice of engaging in a liberatory design process has allowed me to recontextualize the role that engineers play in society. Liberatory design is a way of thinking about design that prioritizes the needs and experiences of marginalized communities, and seeks to empower them to participate fully in all aspects of society. This course and my resulting exposure to liberatory design has helped me understand how my personal beliefs and values play a role in shaping my work as an engineer. 
 
 
It is important to consider, how is our worldview as engineers important? Our worldview is made up of the variety of beliefs, values, and perspectives we have accumulated over our lives, and determines how we interpret and understand the world. In turn, this understanding dictates what we prioritize and assign value to- worldview could be considered the main distinguishing factor between flat earthers and highly educated researchers, for example. That is to say, worldviews drive our agendas, work, and actions. This means that, as engineers, everything we build and design is affected by our worldview. 
	This speaks to the importance of having a sufficiently diverse and nuanced world view. Take as an example, a population of engineers that hasn’t been exposed to the LGBTQ+ community or LGBTQ+ rights; they wouldn’t consider the issues felt by those within that group as ‘important,’ simply because they’d have no basis with which to understand the portion of the population that identifies as genderfluid, nonbinary, or transgender. They would have no motivation to include considerations for them when designing a building, for example- or any other space they may use.  This would lead to their projects perhaps just barely meeting legal requirements, but lacking in any sort of real thought put towards the LGBTQ+ community.  It is easy to see how this example generalizes- ultimately, having an understanding and a real empathy for people from all kinds of different marginalized and underprivileged groups is the main tool we have to incorporate social justice into our projects and work. And ultimately, without easy access to those perspectives, engineers design systems built for the few that inhabit their immediate circle.
In that vein of thinking, I am extremely appreciative that this class allowed me to expand my worldview by giving me a framework with which to deeply understand disability justice. Before this course, I had never deeply thought about disability justice. However, I’ve progressively learned to think about, empathize with, and communicate about people who are part of the disabled community- with much more still to learn. Readings such as the one on how to speak about disabilities have provided me with the ability to incorporate disability justice into my worldview. I believe now have the tools and the information to carry with me throughout my life in order to ensure I never face the common pitfalls engineers do when trying to serve a diverse range of communities/identities.
 
 
It became quite apparent throughout this semester that as engineers and designers, we have what is both an opportunity and a responsibility to create spaces and technologies that are inclusive, accessible, and equitable.  This is firstly a responsibility because engineers have the power to set the standards that operate throughout society. Indeed, we are in the unique role of being able to shape the physical and digital environments that we all cohabit. We have the ability to design buildings, websites, and infrastructure that support social justice and inclusivity, and that provide equal access and opportunities for all members of society.  The discussion at the final presentation really cleared up this aspect of engineering for me- much of engineering when it comes to disability justice and similar issues is determined by legal compliance; however, we have the responsibility to go beyond the legal requirements and design projects with inclusivity in mind, for social justice reasons.  Ultimately, this is a fantastic possibility. While it could be seen as a burden to have to be responsible for ensuring equitable access, that same level of responsibility means that we have the ability to design a fair, universal world which pushes society to a more accepting and accessible place. 
 
 
One of the key learning experiences from this course that I won’t soon forget is the importance of universal design and disability justice. I have come to understand the ways in which the environments and products can be designed to be inclusive and accessible to all- I’m certain that I’ll use the liberatory design modes and mindsets to ensure that I take into account the perspectives of all the people who’ll use my project.  Indeed, the overall impact that projects can have is something I’ve been thinking deeply about- Langon Winner’s ‘Do Artifacts Have Politics?’ made me reevaluate the societal implications that my projects and products have on the world.  I’m extremely appreciative of the fact that I have been introduced to the ways that people with disabilities are marginalized and excluded from mainstream society, and now see the need to address this issue in order to create a more inclusive and accessible world. In the future, I will make a conscious effort to consider the needs and experiences of people with disabilities in my designs, and to create spaces and technologies that are able to empower and include them. I also feel much more equipped to tackle these issues, which without a learned context can seem insurmountable or too foreign to directly address.
Another skill I’ve learned throughout this semester pertains to leadership. I did my best to lead my peers in building and researching the products we ended up prototyping. In that process, I learned that I feel much more secure when I am in the driver’s seat, so to speak, of a project. I also learned about several weaknesses of mine- for example, when I see something not done in the specific way that I imagine would be best, I find it much easier and prefer to redo it on my own, as opposed to working with my peers to communicate what I think could be improved. Additionally, I learned that I should meter my involvement with a project, as I think I perhaps overexpressed the work I wanted to get done in Slack channels and so forth- learning to steer a group in the ‘right’ direction without coming off as overinvolved or obsessive is a skill I’ll need to work on. However, of course, nothing beats hands-on experience, so I’m extremely grateful that I was able to have some experience leading a group this semester. 
A final learning experience from this course that I can take with me in my personal and professional growth is the value of constant feedback. All throughout this semester, we’ve performed outreach of different types- whether it be interviewing our end users, speaking with the administration we were trying to convince, or gathering feedback from peers. These are all different forms of feedback which go towards validating and sculpting potential ideas into viable and productive projects. I plan on using this mindset of constant feedback and validation in my projects in the future. This is especially important in the startup world, which is most likely the area of tech I will find myself in. There are a couple of common mantras repeated in the startup community- “get feedback early and often” and also “ask your users.” While I had previously attempted to internalize these mantras, actually going through the process of designing with the community and their feedback in mind has proven to be an invaluable experience with many learnings about the practical reality of getting feedback from (willing and unwilling) users.
 
 
 
This course has been a valuable learning experience for me. I have come to understand the importance of disability justice and universal design in creating a more inclusive and accessible world. I have seen the value of incorporating universal design principles into my design process, and the importance of addressing disability justice in order to create a more liberatory world. These are lessons that I will take with me in my personal and professional growth, and that I will use to create spaces and technologies that are able to empower and include all individuals. Thank you for this semester of learnings! I won’t soon forget the lessons and perspectives I’ve gained throughout this semester. 
