Migration is a huge political issue in our current world. But why is it so pervasive? And what are its causes? Migration patterns are shaped by push and pull factors, so we could simply list a plethora of them and call it a day, but we won’t; these push and pull factors have origins which we must understand if we are to fully comprehend the phenomenon known as migration.  The most key root cause of migration is globalization and its various accompanying phenomena. 
	
The causes of migration go back to the days of colonization. One of if not the largest current drive of migration is the persisting inequality between developed and developing countries. At the beginning of this class, we studied at great length the reasons for this difference in status between countries as well as the current form it takes as neocolonialism.  Niall Ferguson’s “Why Britain?” highlighted the exploitative nature of these early relations. Indeed, this colonial expansion itself oversaw an increase in migration through seaways. But more relevantly, the fragmentation of national consciousness, which we defined in our “national consciousness”, as well as perhaps the delayment of Rostow’s stages of growth lecture, caused by colonialism, as we have discussed, has led to the political conditions we see today in many developing countries– the conditions which themselves cause the humanitarian crises that are push factors for migration. Additionally, the graphs that we have created discussing the difference in GDP between colonized and colonial nations highlight the inherent disadvantage for the colonized. And so, looking from the perspective of developed vs developing, or as some scholars refer to it, the North-South divide, is an important tool in analyzing the disparities in conditions, economies, etc. which are deeply rooted in colonialism. Of course, these are considerable push factors, and as many studies have confirmed, weak economies and states are highly related. This obfuscates the distinction which many countries and politicians are grappling with, between economic migrants and refugees. If we adopt the perspective I espouse above, we can view the migration issue as one borne simply from the legacy of hegemony as well as the resultant inequality we see today. This isn’t helped by the spread of culture enabled by globalization; developing countries are perfectly able to see that other countries aren’t going through the same struggles they have to, causing the pull factor side of things (push factors can’t exist without pull factors).


Globalization has created the technical prowess and cultural pressures for mobility necessary for migration. The world wide web and a world more linked to the internet than ever before has allowed portrayals of the first-world into even the poorest communities. Not only that, but these devices distribute the knowledge of opportunities and potentials for travel. International travel, in turn, has spread to the farthest reaches of the globe and allowed for the everyman to access all reaches of the world.  All of these technologies have come about as a result of modernisation and are spread through a globalized trade network.

We can understand globalization as flows across borders: flows of capital, products, ideas or people. While globalization has enabled the hyper-mobilization of capital and commodities, as well as various ideas, the mobility of people has been highly regulated; additionally, the mobility of people is discriminatory in nature. While developed countries fight to attract highly trained workers from abroad, such as Indian technology executives or professionals, or African personnel for the British National Health Service, the demand for unskilled workers in various service industries is highly regulated. A key idea to conceptualize is that there is demand for these unskilled workers in construction, food, and hospitality industries to name a few, but workers move through illegal channels. 

If the migration of these unskilled workers is regulated and illegal, why are we seeing such a huge service industry powered by them? To answer that we can look to deviant globalization, as defined by Gilman in his book “Deviant Globalization.” While many politicians stress the need to control the flow of migration and unskilled workers, they seem to be either very ineffective or willing to look the other way. Indeed, walking down a global city like San Francisco lets any cognizant citizen identify a wide array of illegal informal workers hired by contractors. One prescient example is that of the 2002 UK Immigration and Asylum Act, which refused to set up a legal migration process for low-skilled workers, even though the need for them in the National Health Service was socially completely accepted. As we explored in our “Global Cities” lecture, the service industry is an essential part of a global city, and so rich and powerful businessmen who may have some sway in their country’s politics have no incentive to cut out a large part of the service market by limiting migration. Additionally, as we explored, the neoliberal deregulation of labor has led to an accepted informalization of workers in developed countries; this means that trade unions and systems put in place for the prevention of such migration declined. Of course, informal labor is attractive to workers who may be migrants from developing countries, in the absence of clear pathways for unskilled workers to migrate.


The concepts of nationalism and national consciousness which we discussed in our national consciousness and liberation lectures have also given rise to migration. Migration has always existed as a concept and a practice, but globalization has transformed it. Migrans used to move with the express goal of a permanent settlement,  but today we see the phenomena of circular or repeated migration. In the context of circular migration, guest workers are allowed to work for a wage, with the clear knowledge that they would move back home once done with their project. This creates a culture within their home culture of relying on these jobs for sustenance, and becomes a part of their household tradition. And of course, if over time you identify with a group which associates itself with migration, this drives migration and provides a powerful motivation to overcome barriers imposed by states. The crises of national consciousness, which we talked about in our “crises of national consciousness” lecture have persisted and continued to fracture the national consciousness of many developing nations. Without a real sense of nationalism for your country, what exactly is keeping you there? Well, the economic and political situation, which, as a citizen in a globalized world, you may see other countries are performing better in.  Of course, we have seen the rise of transnational communities. The ease of crossing borders and communicating through them allows groups of people to live entirely across borders, forming transnational communities. These transnational communities are an important example of our modern and more flexible understanding of national identity, which used to be very one-state focused. The transnational communities can link two countries together and lead to increased migration, such as the transnational communities which exist in Mexico/USA.
